1. PLoS Genet. 2017 May 17;13(5):e1006785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006785. 
eCollection 2017 May.

The bantam microRNA acts through Numb to exert cell growth control and feedback 
regulation of Notch in tumor-forming stem cells in the Drosophila brain.

Wu YC(1), Lee KS(1)(2), Song Y(1)(3), Gehrke S(1), Lu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, United States of America.
(2)BioNanotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.

Notch (N) signaling is central to the self-renewal of neural stem cells (NSCs) 
and other tissue stem cells. Its deregulation compromises tissue homeostasis and 
contributes to tumorigenesis and other diseases. How N regulates stem cell 
behavior in health and disease is not well understood. Here we show that N 
regulates bantam (ban) microRNA to impact cell growth, a process key to NSC 
maintenance and particularly relied upon by tumor-forming cancer stem cells. 
Notch signaling directly regulates ban expression at the transcriptional level, 
and ban in turn feedback regulates N activity through negative regulation of the 
Notch inhibitor Numb. This feedback regulatory mechanism helps maintain the 
robustness of N signaling activity and NSC fate. Moreover, we show that a 
Numb-Myc axis mediates the effects of ban on nucleolar and cellular growth 
independently or downstream of N. Our results highlight intricate 
transcriptional as well as translational control mechanisms and feedback 
regulation in the N signaling network, with important implications for NSC 
biology and cancer biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006785
PMCID: PMC5453605
PMID: 28520736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

2. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jun 19;10(6):e1004343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004343. 
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Transcriptional control of steroid biosynthesis genes in the Drosophila 
prothoracic gland by ventral veins lacking and knirps.

Danielsen ET(1), Moeller ME(1), Dorry E(1), Komura-Kawa T(2), Fujimoto Y(3), 
Troelsen JT(4), Herder R(5), O'Connor MB(5), Niwa R(6), Rewitz KF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Meguro, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University, Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.
(6)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan; PRESTO, JST, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan.

Comment in
    The POU Factor Ventral Veins Lacking/Drifter Directs the Timing of 
Metamorphosis through Ecdysteroid and Juvenile Hormone Signaling.

Specialized endocrine cells produce and release steroid hormones that govern 
development, metabolism and reproduction. In order to synthesize steroids, all 
the genes in the biosynthetic pathway must be coordinately turned on in 
steroidogenic cells. In Drosophila, the steroid producing endocrine cells are 
located in the prothoracic gland (PG) that releases the steroid hormone 
ecdysone. The transcriptional regulatory network that specifies the unique PG 
specific expression pattern of the ecdysone biosynthetic genes remains unknown. 
Here, we show that two transcription factors, the POU-domain Ventral veins 
lacking (Vvl) and the nuclear receptor Knirps (Kni), have essential roles in the 
PG during larval development. Vvl is highly expressed in the PG during 
embryogenesis and is enriched in the gland during larval development, suggesting 
that Vvl might function as a master transcriptional regulator in this tissue. 
Vvl and Kni bind to PG specific cis-regulatory elements that are required for 
expression of the ecdysone biosynthetic genes. Knock down of either vvl or kni 
in the PG results in a larval developmental arrest due to failure in ecdysone 
production. Furthermore, Vvl and Kni are also required for maintenance of 
TOR/S6K and prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) signaling in the PG, two major 
pathways that control ecdysone biosynthesis and PG cell growth. We also show 
that the transcriptional regulator, Molting defective (Mld), controls early 
biosynthetic pathway steps. Our data show that Vvl and Kni directly regulate 
ecdysone biosynthesis by transcriptional control of biosynthetic gene expression 
and indirectly by affecting PTTH and TOR/S6K signaling. This provides new 
insight into the regulatory network of transcription factors involved in the 
coordinated regulation of steroidogenic cell specific transcription, and 
identifies a new function of Vvl and Knirps in endocrine cells during 
post-embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004343
PMCID: PMC4063667
PMID: 24945799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

3. PLoS Genet. 2017 Apr 17;13(4):e1006729. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006729. 
eCollection 2017 Apr.

Neuronal cell fate specification by the molecular convergence of different 
spatio-temporal cues on a common initiator terminal selector gene.

Stratmann J(1), Thor S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.

The extensive genetic regulatory flows underlying specification of different 
neuronal subtypes are not well understood at the molecular level. The Nplp1 
neuropeptide neurons in the developing Drosophila nerve cord belong to two 
sub-classes; Tv1 and dAp neurons, generated by two distinct progenitors. Nplp1 
neurons are specified by spatial cues; the Hox homeotic network and GATA factor 
grn, and temporal cues; the hb -> Kr -> Pdm -> cas -> grh temporal cascade. 
These spatio-temporal cues combine into two distinct codes; one for Tv1 and one 
for dAp neurons that activate a common terminal selector feedforward cascade of 
col -> ap/eya -> dimm -> Nplp1. Here, we molecularly decode the specification of 
Nplp1 neurons, and find that the cis-regulatory organization of col functions as 
an integratory node for the different spatio-temporal combinatorial codes. These 
findings may provide a logical framework for addressing spatio-temporal control 
of neuronal sub-type specification in other systems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006729
PMCID: PMC5411104
PMID: 28414802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

4. Development. 2017 Sep 1;144(17):3168-3176. doi: 10.1242/dev.143461. Epub 2017 
Jul 31.

Patterning of the Drosophila L2 vein is driven by regulatory interactions 
between region-specific transcription factors expressed in response to Dpp 
signalling.

Martín M(1), Ostalé CM(1), de Celis JF(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa', CSIC and Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa', CSIC and Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain jfdecelis@cbm.csic.es.

Pattern formation relies on the generation of transcriptional landscapes 
regulated by signalling pathways. A paradigm of epithelial patterning is the 
distribution of vein territories in the Drosophila wing disc. In this tissue, 
Decapentaplegic signalling regulates its target genes at different distances 
from the source of the ligand. The transformation of signalling into coherent 
territories of gene expression requires regulatory cross-interactions between 
these target genes. Here, we analyse the mechanisms generating the domain of 
knirps expression in the presumptive L2 vein of the wing imaginal disc. We find 
that knirps is regulated by four Decapentaplegic target genes encoding the 
transcription factors aristaless, spalt major, spalt-related and optix The 
expression of optix is activated by Dpp and repressed by the Spalt proteins, 
becoming restricted to the most anterior region of the wing blade. In turn, the 
expression of knirps is activated by Aristaless and repressed by Optix and the 
Spalt proteins. In this manner, the expression of knirps becomes restricted to 
those cells where Spalt levels are sufficient to repress optix, but not 
sufficient to repress knirps.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.143461
PMID: 28760811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.